OK. So welcome to the lecture two of our course. We are now going into the next steps. So we started from the requirements last time, right? OK. I. I assume you guys nod here. So we started from the requirements process last time and we described requirements of their role in system design and in overall process of architecture. Now we're going one level down. One level down and going into the. Conceptual space. And starting the. Design and architecture as a processes. Then we will talk about. So the first three bullets will be the conceptual part and then we will talk about gradually moving to the more software design oriented things and we will talk about homework by the way about the homework, so. Homework homework is closed for the first work, one is closed. I will take a look to your homework. Post results. In the chat. Later next week, Monday, Tuesday. OK. Homework 2 will be much more interesting. And will talk about it at the end of the lectures lecture, OK. So we talked about requirements and. We need to understand that the move from the requirements to the design is not strict, is not direct. It's not very well defined process. So it's not the picture, it's not the picture on the right, it's something on the left. You are starting with some process of defining requirements as we talked on the 1st lecture. And. Gradually move refining those requirements to the design, but the design itself is affecting and influencing requirements to be changed, refined, cleared, removed, added and you the the line between them is blurred. It's not strict. Any project that we are starting any program that we're trying to write, whether it's big? Designing rocket or designing a huge database or a small homework. You need to write some small control command line control utility. Basic questions to ask every project in one way or another goes through these. Faces the first phase, the question of why. Why are we doing this project? What value are we bringing? Informal language. It's called stakeholder analysis. Who is the beneficiary? Why are we doing? What value are getting? How this will be? Delivered, et cetera. So let's take all stakeholder node process the second one we didn't talk about this. This is all of the scope for for this lecture, but it's we intuitively know about this. But there is a there are some very formal processes to do this, but. How will score for this one? The the amount we that we know and you know should be enough for proposals of this course. So next next one is. Defining what we must do. What the project looks like? What are the functions we want to do in which form etcetera. That's the require, not form. With what we want to do requirements definition, that's what we talked last time. I hope you guys get actually. This is a good place to make a pause and get. Did you guys understood? The first lecture and the purpose of the first homework. You guys feel more proficient in that? Everyone. OK. Let's start with. Left up down Arina. Yes. Yes, I got the homework. I understood it and I think it helped me reinforce my knowledge a bit more. What was the? One big take away that you learned last lecture that you didn't know. The first thing that I didn't know was. The first initial commit of Git, I didn't know that it was. Done at that time, I hoped it would have been done a bit later. Also, the points where we. Made the document. I started looking For more information. And gain more. OK, good. And you'll take us? Let's go to. Arthur or. Is not with us razmika shakin. And the main finding of the first lecture. The most interesting part for me was the homework. So that I could see. OK. How the initial design of Kit was done and then by reading 1/2 of the documents that you have sent to us about Git. Not which was in the schedule. Just the idea of that encrypt encryptions or what type of data structures to use for. Tracking down the changes in the Git history, it was interesting part for me because I'm a bit of a fan of data structures, so it OK. was interesting to see that it can be used in such phases. OK, good. Did you learn anything new in terms of the requirement? Process. I guess I have. I have heard about such things, but I have just learned it, learned it in a different way. So it it was beneficial for me. OK. Sounds good. Then next quiz I will go to to the rest of the people. OK now. Requirement definition is the last lecture. And now we are going into the design space. Now how we could do it? How we can achieve implement require? And the problem is you figured out already from the first homework there are many many ways to do it. Some extent this is the graph that is showing phases of this three things that you have. The beginning of the process, you have high ambiguity. And the whole. The sequent processes are to reduce that ambiguity. And. Ultimate reduction of the ambiguity is when you have done, you finish your requirements. Usually it comes. Mostly at the end of the folding process, so it goes high and then goes down. And when you finish the system or the first version, you're done with the first set of requirements. Second thing is what we call conceptual design. Conceptual design is based on. National concept notion of a concept is the we don't know what it is yet, but those are the things that. Our design is going to revolve around and you have heard the notion of a concept and a notion of a conceptual design, correct? You heard a. Yes. No, don't know. No. Oh, OK. So there is this notion of a conceptual design. It's a very well known. Term, which came from the civil architecture. Which is embodying of the main idea of the system or thing that you are trying to architect or design. We don't know what is it yet, but the term is all around like you have heard, conceptual design of a city. Conceptual design of a car. Conceptual design of. Locomotive, etcetera. Revolves around the notion of concept and embodying or expressing the concept or concepts in some form, and we are going to use that term in our process. 'Cause this is what it was wrong so. And we're designing the process of design to get an architecture, the revolving around the concept concept is the allocation, whether it be physical informational software of some type of function or process. Or could be an even an abstract notion to some type of the form. And definition of structural interfaces among those objects. So you have your creating some idea of a concept which is central element. Then you are mapping it. So which is a central element of mapping function to form? So you have function form. Mapping is a concept and then all your design is how to reveal those concepts. How to embody them and how to connect them to each other? That's the high level design on definitional architecture. So concept consists of function. Which is related. So function related to a form by concept concept is connecting function to a flow, mapping it to do flow and concept. They you said that concept usually exist you need to reveal it. One way of doing it or you can create a concept and especially in software we. Will see how it is done. By the way, going to the homework. Little bit Segway, I'll talk to RSM make. As Ghanoush and what is your opinion, our concepts or central concept in git? Hello, Mr. professor. I would like to say that it's my first attendance to the lecture because I wasn't applied for course and Miss Accent said that I could join your team a little bit later, so I wasn't present. Yeah, but have you done the homework? Yeah, no. OK, so you need to go back to do your homework and meanwhile. Tamara. Play. And so I think it's very stupid. Can you please pick up? I can't hear you well well. Hi, can you hear me now? I think is distributed version control system is the main concept. No. No. Any other takers? Well, we will skip Peter on your vacant. Can you please repeat the question? But in your opinion is a central concept in git or concepts. If you have more. What is the function mapped to form? I don't know actually. Any takers? Anyone has an idea or? More good idea to easily find and managed. Directories and files. Say it again. Which? What the ****? What was the first part? Manage and find. The directories and files. Was the first port managed? You can see the changes. What was before managed? Sorry, find, find and manage. Don't see the changes in them. Yes, you. I think you would. You want to say is. Tracking changes. Sorry. I don't you want to say. Tracking changes? Correct or not? Yes, yes. K. So what is the concept change? Like seeing the changes and. To easily like to structure the file system. You are close, but not precise. Ignore. Think about this and we will get to it in the middle of lecture. OK, so concepts. It's very easy to understand the concept of the process of architecture. If you go to the civil. Or physical objects architecture, because in the civil architecture. We can have a concept so of. Single family home here is the example of single family home which is being mapped to different for somebody. Can you please guys mute because I'm here on that call. Which is mapped to a different forums like on the left you this is a single family home which is. Architect it as. A beach house and the right one is an architected as a typical contemporary. House which? Is not. In physical forms, for example, if you have. My camera you can say, OK, this is the. Concept of the camera. Which? Is expressed as a physical object which has defined structural interfaces. In the form of Ausb miniusb card, it has battery and. Other things which are connected with this system. It's not part of the system. In software, this is an example of a. High level architecture of a package consists of two main parts. One is conditionally called front end, the second one is conditionally called back end it has. Model input written in Python, which is then expressed which goes into the element called Dynamo, which is then gradually lowers it and at some point you are executing that on a machine. This this is so this wall picture is a conceptual model is a conceptual architecture because it has very. Coarse grain boxes. That's it. And there is a very. Well defined top bottom data flow. Reality is much more green and. And to be honest, this is if you start breaking down the previous picture to to. Reality in terms of like the more fine grained modules, this is what it looks like. Practically intolerable, to be honest. But this is the reality. So. Conceptual model allows us. To reason about system without going into this level of details and becoming insane. So. Happening is a process. When we take the function and map it into the four. This is very, very important that the function here is not. Definition this is. It's more about a process. It's not about not not any function, not any function should be mapped to. Distinct form and we will talk about this next time. So next two lectures are going to be about what we call system decomposition, practical system decomposition, and then practical obstruction creation. And we will see why. Pure functional decomposition is bad. But for now, we need to think about the function in abstract form. Is a process. So some type of the function as a process mapped to a concept a mapped through a concept to a form. Those two things are to be loose now, but that's fine for now. We need to understand this process of conceptual design. So. K. Let me pause here and. It is clear, at least on a conceptual part. Questions. Actually, for me the mapping the process of mapping some function to a form. Huh. Is I don't understand mapping function to form. What does that form mean? Very good question and hold that question because that was what I was looking for. Hold that question for a while. Let's go. So now we're going to define that mapping, and now we're going to define what the concept is and how can we map it. And then by the end of the lecture, you still have quite that question. Answered. We will answer it, OK. OK, OK. No concert is a mapping or a thing that is created by architect. It must allow an execution of all functions that is associated with it. It establishes the vocabulary you are now starting to reason about the system in terms of this vocabulary, which is defined by you in a formal concept. And can implicitly represent the technology. So the informal definition is. Allsup is a product system vision, idea, notion, mental model, or part of the function which maps form to function. Shows or embodies the working principle of the system or subsystem or the module? Is in the solution specific vocabulary. It's not doing something off. E and it's an abstraction. So this is kind of very high level abstraction. It's not an attribute of a system, but it's a mapping and we are going now to discuss more how it looks like. So the concept is expressed by a few words or kind of short friends, for example, and we are going to use a refrigerator. We are going to use, for example, we are going to use VCs and refrigerator because refrigerator is much more easy to reason about and will give you the intuition how to deal with things. For example, because they all the what is the refrigerator? The concept of the refrigerator is a insulated box containing mechanically chilled air. Right. As the real not. Right. OK. Is there any other expression of the how can we view? Refrigerator is a different concept. Is there any other idea? Is there any other concept of the refrigerator? And the same thing, but just with me by using different words, I guess because. We all deals the refrigerator in the same way. OK, OK. You don't put our like our shoes in there. It's just a thing which keeps fresh the meal. So that's it's function. OK, that's that's a very good thing. 'cause we now we're going to now define what is the fresh. But. It's important to have this concept of a system subsystem module. Doesn't matter on which obstruction level you are going in which hierarchy. You need to think with this concept. Both of these often expressed Ward 2 / a short phrase and can be. Noted or depicted in in the document as a graphical icon. As soon as you clearly define the concepts, the nature of the parts is becoming more or less. Clear established. At at. Also abstract and. They are often associated with the form that they are going to be implement. Good. So no, I'm going backwards. So that's a concept, because it also describes the physical form of the refrigerator. Yes. So you could describe the form. Form can be physical, for example in terms of the refrigerators or physical object. Form can be structure. For example, software, we don't have physical form, but we have structure and that is what the concept. And the function is the chilled air that. In the. That's a good question. That's a very good question. And just I think it's one more two more slides and we will get to that, OK. Yes, you are now thinking you are starting to think correctly OK. in terms of like OK. What is the function? Right. And OK, what is the form? So you say, OK, if this is a form, what is the function good. Consult formal definitions, personalization of function and mapping to its physical or informational embodiment of form. It also specifies very clear the list of variables that are important and needs to be refined later in the process of the design. And also it says that. The consoles that they are going to define in the process of designing and connected with each other and form can form the system or can form. Actually, this is also important higher level concept. Let's stick to. Simple definition of the defining or forming the system or subsystem for our purposes. And. We are while we are doing the concepts. Why? Why this mapping exists? Why do we need this? We need to go back here and talk about the value proposition. So this is in the first slide. You remember that? I told that this stack holder analysis right, so this is what the process. This part where's my leather? So this delivery process. Is when the concept arise or reviewed and it starts with the beneficiaries, somebody or something doesn't matter. So the difference between beneficiary can be human or inhuman. So if you're doing not in human but not human, beneficiary can be a person who has a need. And this need. Is expressed or interpreted as a set of goals, which we can do during the requirement analysis of requirement specification process and then we are now creating the delivery process to define the concept. So the process working on some of the top of operand. Create some type of the product and this is the conceptual design process. Beneficiary can be system tool. For example, if you are doing system programming. You can. You're the product object can be consumed or the. Value can be delivered to another system. You don't need. It doesn't need to be human at the end. So that's the kind of loose distinction between system programming and non system programming. It's either you're doing for the different software, or you're doing for end user. And here are we going to the refrigerator example. So. What refrigerator is working on? So we are, we are talking about some type of attributes, the process that is working on operand to review. Some type of concept and. Was asking about the, so Marina was asking about Marina talked about the form. And Rosen was talking about. Definition of the concept. He he didn't get it right. No, in the reverse. The reverse you get it. And you don't don't want to talk. No, I just asked what the what was the meaning of the phone? What does that for mean? OK, form OK. Now we'll we're going into that. Let's get to the refrigerator example. M. So. Let's talk about the value of the of the refrigerator, right. So now we have. This concept of the refrigerator, which is how we're trying to first of all, we need to define the function and we need to define the four OK, the operand, what are we working on? Like what is the processed notion? It's called operant in the previous. It's this one. So what is the operand in our case? Would it be possible? It's here. I should have hidden it before revealing it's food. Right. You are the operand which you are transforming his food. What is the attribute of the operand of for the food that you are transforming? Maria was Maria was talking Maria or Marina. Or Marina. I was talking about. Freshness correct? No. I was asking if the. Refrigerated air in the. If the children are in the refrigerator, is a function of the refrigerator. Or the value. No, no, it the it's not a function. It's the process that delivers the the. So here's the thing. It's the tool to execute the function, but the function is. Here is the original. So how do you do you get the attribute on the in our case attribute is what we call pileage red. So why we need refrigerator? We want food to degrade slower. Or don't degrade at all. Alright, so the attribute of the food that we're trying to influence is the spoilage rate. So what is the function? The function is how to slow the spoilage. That's what we need to now do, OK? So we have the functions the Polish slowing. If you do it good then your food will be spoiled slower. You will get this point rate low and food will be fresh longer. That's the value we're getting. How we can do this? All can implement this attribute. How can we can implement this Polish slogan? That's where we are going into the console. That's where you need creativity. This is the place when you need to be creative, OK? How can you do spoiled slawing? You can do it by drawing. Dried form food is can be. Kept can be for a very long time, right mastermar. Very. Keep it for a very long time. Other way of slowing is irradiating. If you get all water out of it. Can be. You can keep it for for a very, very long time. Guys node. Put some :) in in the chat so I can already in the reaction. Or you can chill. There are other ways to do we can, we can say, oh what we need to do is. We can do quantum teleportation to the power universe. Where Spoo doesn't spoil and when we need it, we can do quantum teleportation back. Yeah, that's the solution too. It's not feasible. You can't actually create quantum computation. So we are ending up with something more. Feasible. Chilling. OK. So now we said, OK, how can we chill thing? How can we chill food? Now you have a function. You need to chill. OK for it can be unbordered in a thing which is called chiller. What are the forms of chiller? Now you can have a cooler or you can have a refrigerator. Is there any other forms of chilling? Build in the keeping the meal outside. When it's cold. Right. So practically you're saying if you live on a North Pole or closer to the North Pole, you don't. Yes, that's another form, yes. You don't need chiller right? That's creative way of. Producing the spoilage rate, but it's out of the scope because. You are now changing the parameters of the problem by moving the subject the stakeholder, to the different place can be done not in this case. Yeah. Thank you for being creative. OK here. Any questions here? You get this operand attribute function concept. Yes. So in the real world world, the. Orders will be blunt, and that's fine if you stick to the conceptual idea of creating concepts. You'll be good. OK. Now we are doing the first part of the example, the decomposition. It's a function decomposition. We will talk next time when you need or don't need to do functional decomposition, but it's practically giving you the idea how to do this. You have a generic concept which can be to attributes in some of the system objects which has parts and then there are other parts for the supporting the attributes and you have the end of The thing is operand. So identify the form, identify the form of the whole. Product system and then you need to zoom in. Zoom out when needed. Zoom in the zoom the processes of the function, what it is doing. How are going to do the chilling? So what is the delivery? Primary process. What are the interfaces? How we are going to operate it? Is it running on? Is is running? The house. Do we have for example in case of refrigerator you need to think. Process of chilling can be done, for example through ice. OK. Where? Where am I getting ice? What is the process of getting ice? What are the? What is the environment? Am I in the North Pole or north in case of software? What this? What this what this subsystem or this design is to be plugged in? Where am I operating? Am I operating on a end user device on the phone in the cloud? What are the paths that connect them to each other? And if we go to the other example of the form and function. So we said, OK. Now we have chiller which can be done as a cooler, right? Implemented as a cooler tool as a form of a cooler to implement the function of chilling and we have these. Processes related to it which we are connecting to the part. You have top you have box with bottom. You have eyes. We have food. Is there any supporting service maybe? So what is the rate of the external heat? Do we need ambient light? Who is using it? What? And then you say, OK? These are the functions that I'm going to connect. And the chiller can be implemented as a function of cooler. You put ice, you put food. And. You're good. It's one of the ways of creating a concept. Your map. This is one of the concepts where you map the function to the form. Design comes when you have different parameters. In case of the cooler, what are the parameters that can affect this design? It size maybe? Guys what else? Form like shape. OK. What else? Material you said. Materials inside materials are outside, but there is more. There is a one essential for. Maybe requirements of? The. Degree of air inside I don't know. That's. Yeah, that's a good thing. Manna Marina. Kind of get to the point. Like controlling the. Rate of the. Spoilage, right? The problem with the cooler is that. Yes. First of all, can you create ideal insulation? If you want to keep the. Temperature inside constant. One of the requirements, one of the design variables will be can you have ideal insulation. So you will not lose any. Cold so heat will not get in as we know it's very hard, right? So on the central attributes. That the rate of spoilage is not well covered, or not sufficiently covered by this concrete concept. This concrete design attribute. So. And now we're getting to the kind of this, hey, OK, we designed system. It's a cooler. It has box with the bottom, works with the top some type of the chilling air that is related with the eyes, and there are. The concrete variables now are the design space. What is the box sizes? What is the wall thickness? What is the wall material? How wealth is insulated. What does it have a door or does not have a door? How many of these we need in the house? Can we move it around? Is it stationary? What will happen after the spoilage, etcetera? So all these operating parameters and design variables create a design space that you now you need to work. And now we're getting to the former faction. One of the other ways of doing the chilling keys chiller is to map it to the refrigerator. When we say OK, but you know what? Cooler is good, but it's too small. I wanted to have. Vertical door. I wanted to have different temperatures. I wanted to try out constantly and I want to have a constant temperature inside. Now you are going into a different disasters. Practically change the variables and now you have a different design space when you might need to introduce. Two-month or threeon in this case that will exchange the heat for the outside. You need now to do that you need electric motor, sensors, controls, etcetera. More appropriate mapping of the function because we refined the requirements and the design space we choose. Different mapping. All of them are designed. One is one set of parameter design parameter, the other is different set of parameters. But they both depending on. Variables or depending on the requirement. Be OK. OK. And here is structural. So here is a function or process and here is the structure. Now you have structural frame. You say the interaction, so this is showing the structure of the refrigerator and the processes that. Parts interface with each other. Good thing, OK. So there's one more thing I will go to this so. Cost of generation versus selection. Practically what we showed here is we show that the concept. Is a process of mapping. Or the full function to a form we have the notion of an operand. We have the notion of what attribute that we want to change. And we creatively create. System or subsystem? And map it to the form. During the mapping or the form we have various parameters starting from. Require the various parameters parameters. Throughout some requirements, it can be caused. It can be operating environment, it can be data requirement, it can be performance requirements. All those things are defining the design space. And. Based on this design space based on the requirements, you can choose different concerts which satisfies the regional requirements. And we're going to the git. We'll go fast to be able to go into the rest of this lecture and finish on time. Get. I'm very glad that you guys. Did the homework because you learn something new and actually you are now starting to think as a system architect. Yes. What is now that we learn this? What is the concept of a kit or concept? More absolutely concept of a version control system. One or two, three words express the notion of a version control system. Breaking the code breaker. More horrible up level. But that's good. Good. System that keeps track of your directories and files. ALS, but what about any other ideas? Collaboration. It's. Collaboration. It's very vague. Notor. Many changes to the source code. You around, but the concept is actually far in time. Right. But the whole idea of the version control system is I want to have the file but in time I want to have this file. Now there you go. Three years ago or whatever. And that's the concept. Now to implement that concept you can have now different things. Now we're going to design space, right? And get chose very few very well defined abstractions. It does only how many obstructions? Showing you. Those who read the article, how many obstructions does GitHub? How many instructions are there? Who? 3 blobs and commit. And. Correct. There are only three obstructions. There are only three things to the only three obstructions to map this function. Practically what? You say what you need is that I want this file, but I want it in a time. I want a version of this file. I want to be able to manipulate with versions of the file. What is the file? What file is represented as? Block. BLOB. OK. How far is organized into? Please hear her quickly. And version is represented as. All right. It's coming. So. Who guys get now and I'm going, I think. Rosmic asked a question about Githrid. If I'm not mistaken. No. No. OK. Play. Anyway, did you guys get the idea that what is the concept and what is the function and what is the for? An example of git. Yes. OK. How can you? OK, then. Tell me. Marina, what is the concert? Yes, yes. What is the function and what is it for? The concept of git is that you can have. Any version of the file you have committed in any time. OK. Retreated. The form is maybe. Can get commits be the form of? No. If you want to, you need to defend your definition. It's not on me. The other OK, good. So sorry. I think it's. Go ahead. Should I speak? Yeah, I'm good. I'm waiting for you. And. And the function is. Retreating the files you. Getting the files you committed. From one, for example local machine to another. OK. Machines are not very interesting here. Any other ideas? But OK. Thank you for that. That's why getting there. So this is how you get the console. You need to refine any other ideas? So the. Concept. Yes, the concept of gate is having a system. Which will not only track your code, but will also allow multiple developers to work on the same thing and. Keep and knowing of the IT was a bit long. Having a system which will track code and you can you can get your old code whenever you want. I also keeping it in the history. So let's concat formal function. Function for example, the first function is to be able to. Push your code into some server, so this is the function and how to how this function is implemented. What type of? What type of things is used for achieving this are the forms? Nobody agree with this definition. Yep. Huh. Anybody. Is there anyone who disagrees with this definition? And I know one guy who is a bit bored here and let him speak. Either do you agree with the definition? Sorry I didn't listen. What was the definition again? OK. Me, can you please repeat for specifically for Peter? Definition of what concepts or function or what? What's that form function? Concept is having a system which will track your code on the low multiple developers to see all the changes of the code of the project. The next. Function for example one function can be. Can be storing code and the form of storing this code is choosing the block idea, for example and. The story the for example you store some txt file storage of TXT file is a function and our form in these terms is block. Using the obstruction of law for the specific function. Well. So I think the form is correct. There is no ambiguity there. I think the first sentence that you said looks more like a function to me. Another concept. So in the. Thing about. In the middle. I'm trying to remember how how exactly you said that. I think the well overall, I think the function and the concepts are a little bit mixed up. So I would say that the concept should be is like like a. You can call it like a whatever a database for files or a file system, right? Which is like I don't know marked file system hashed file system will date it. File system. That's a concept. I would use the ladder. Yes, I would say that the concept is the dated file Yeah, do. system. Which means that you can you can address. Sorry. 'Cause, it's old. Oh, OK. Not that he's old. It's just it has the time stamps. Say it again. I'm just joking that date. It means the old. Oh, no, no, not the first date. And we're not talking about that. Yes. OK. OK, the concept is the data file system, right? So you have, so the whole the concept is that I want to have a file system and the files in it. Specific date I want. The example is snapshot of the structure of the file system. Week ago. Year ago today and I want to be able to go through the history data file system is the console. OK, what is the function? Actually, to be able to retrieve at any moment of the time snapshot of the file system, what is it for? The form is a content addressable hash map, practically. And now you can have lots of other design parameters to deal with. For example, you can say to implement this. What I can do? I can just have hashmap and that's it. It's an implementation of the concept. It's not very good because there's one more. Requirement there for the kit that how can I exchange this information with other participants and that's where the notion of a commit comes, and that's where the notion of a delta comes, and that's where the notion of a compression comes. That's all week. I'm sorry. Could we talk about form one one more time? Because for me like I can't. I can't imagine what it that form like for objects. I can, but can we repeat? Notion of for again. In the Git example or in general. Yes, yes, it's OK. Pete. Digit OK. Open. Yes. Oh, it was a echo from you. So the function I want. Move the time right? I want a version of the function in the time. That's the function in the form. The form is a content of the Restable hash map with BLOB. Practically, that's the form. OK. So can you say that is some kind of result? That there is what? Like a result of a function. Read out or resolve. Just read out result. I would say it's. What is the result of the? I would say it's an implementation. I I think I got I didn't get questions. it, I think. You can describe form as an implementation of a concept. So if you have a concept like of a file system, you may have like multiple versions of that. Going back to this even. Here. I think this is open this file right? The attribute is content at the time. Right. Yes. OK. So now you have this attribute transformation. How you can map this. That's the kind of the question is asking. So think about this. What is the operand? It's the file or file on the file, but director, which is also a file, right? The tree is also file and then you say OK. What is the attribute? Attribute is content and time. So it is late. OK. So now how do I transform this attribute? And that's where you start mapping to the form and that's where. OK, I have a content which I need to preserve in time and I need to go between one content to another depending on the time. How can I do that? One of the things you can have just date is you can map it right because this is the date and this is the file and I'm going to preserve. All the content of the file. That's one thing. The other thing you can do, say if I look to the file as a BLOB. I can actually do hash thing and keep on the hash because it already has the parameters of the date and certain metadata and if it's BLOB then I don't need to preserve the whole thing. I can do deltas and preserve only deltas, and I connect them with the commit notion of a commit, which is here. Yeah. No. Yes, kind of. Thank you. Play. If you have a few questions, please ask them or you can ask Question. Please operate the translation. later in the chat on this call. OK. Thank you. OK. Yeah, see, here is very well defined. Similar to the refrigerator diagram that you can contemplate on later. This is. Concluding this part and we're getting to the more tactical things. So we learned the notional concept. We learned the notion of a structural architectural conceptual design. And we said that to remove the concept that we need to very clearly understand the operand. What are we transforming? Which attributes what the function looks like as a process and how we are going to map the process to four to reveal the concept. The other day. The goodness it's we're trying to formalize the goodness, which is very hard to do, but in some extent it's multi criteria or multi objective. Value to deliver. Various things in general. Which comprises of the requirements, functional requirements, non functional requirements such as performance. Resource utilization. All personal requirements, environmental requirements, other. Limitations like cost, et cetera so. We need to understand that those are the requirement space. We have designs and we have designed very wells and we are picking things based on how well this fit into this multi objective thing. OK. Are we clear on this? Did you guys get the idea? Most likely you didn't get the whole idea, but you get some of the idea. Yes. Anything which is completely unclear now. I think everything is more or less clear. Yes, it's OK. Yes. OK, good. Now we're getting into back to our tactical things, OK? We started with requirements and we talked about the conceptual design and the concepts and how they are emerging. And concepts can be consult can take different forms themselves. I'm not going into that yet, but we have time at the end of the course we can get into that in more details. But we talked on the 1st lecture about the complexity. Do you remember this? Yes. And now we are doing a little bit of shoot job. What are we going to do now? We are going to talk about modules. We are going to talk about the mapping, the form, how you are going to implement that function, how you are going to. Execute on the concept. You remember this too, right? Causes of the complexity. If not, then I can go through it once more. In our job, in our line of job, the and everything is expressed as a code, whether we like it or not, right? We have a code and associated with it metadata, future comments and documentation in form of comments or in form of some other type of documentation. So. We are now going into how we are going to implement. This form. And. Going into the design space for software, so we're doing a jump. We didn't talk about how to break into the things which that's that's something we're going to talk next time. But we need to start developing the intuition. And for that, I'm going to talk about the module and we're going to do a homework about the modules and about. Comosition without having the formal definitions yet, and then we will in that section we'll go back and talk about the compositional look to our homework with a different knowledge. So we talked about this thing that this very important to understand that working code is not enough, especially if we are doing systemic or systematic programming and design. And. Oh, you can have something working quick and easy, and that's usually done on the POC or proof of concept state. Good design. Needs process. In this time you can't do it very fast if you can't do it, you're genius. Usually people cannot do it very fast, so you need iterations. You need to go do something quick and dirty. Then you need to iterate, iterate, think about it and get to a good design. There is a very well known term called technical debt. Have you guys heard about the term technical debt? No, I didn't. OK. Technical debt is usually is a set of things that you need to do to improve your code or set of questions and tickets and issues, jurors, whatever they are associated with your code and you need to fix them to get more robust, not better design but. You are always deferring them to the future, so there's technical work that needs to be done. But it associated with the future. So it's called technical debt. If you do quick under design you. Usually will end up with technical debt. Technical debt is a cost in the future. The problem with trying to go debt. It tends to pile up and at some point it becomes unbearable and your whole system collaps. Run. Es collapses. Run. What is the? Prayed of a good desire. We call it good or clean conceptual design. One of the traits of clean conceptual design is what we call in modular design. That module design is, though it's a kind of unit of decomposition. It's very hard to get it right. You need to have very disciplined mind to do it. What? The other scenario, if you like in. Refrigerator, though it's not very ideal, but if you have a physical system that you have independent parts that you can connect with each other each other and they have a very well defined. Intervaces that you can ideally connect. And everything is great. You have ideal desire. The problem is that you are not in real life. It happens rarely. Interfaces don't match. Module was designed with one goal in a time doing one function. Then you start building more functions and your concept console start breaking. Now. How can we get? There. So what are the traits of? Good modules module as a unit of decomposition for for us. We didn't get to the decomposition yet, so we get some ideas using these conceptual design process that we talked in the first part of the lecture. But we don't have the formal notion before going to the formal notion. Next the next lecture. So we know that the module. Abstract form of a module is the unit of the composition. OK, what is the? What are the good traits of the good design good module? Any ideas here? How do you define good module? For example. Yes, go ahead. For example, suppose we create another module, but in that module we want to use that perfect module, so. And it also gives us some interface so. While and while using that module with its interfaces, we don't need to. Dive deep into the implementation of that module, how the interfaces are implemented. So it's where. It's something where where which is very easy to use I guess. For me, that's the. That's a good. Best description for the module. OK, so you define a trade of good module as it has. I'm rephrasing, but tell me if I'm wrong it correctly or not. So is that one of the trades of a good module? It has a very clean interface. Also, it's very easy to extend and. I guess there there may be some missing points. We can fill it up later. OK, so clean interface extendable by extendable. You mean that? My interpretation of the extendable is the cost of change is low. Yes, yes. OK. What else? Module should be independent from the other modules. OK. We are talking about. Band of water models so. Can you rephrase it? Can you elaborate on that, Arthur? So every module should be independent from the other modules. They shouldn't be related with each other. Is it possible in the real world design? I guess yes, it's possible. Can you give me an example? Ah, no. Not now. OK. Think about it. Yeah, you you made a good point. Intuitively, you are doing it correctly, but you need to have an example of that. Like what is the example of this completely independent model? And I can tell you one of the examples, for example. Last time we talked about grip, right? Web is a very good example. Yes, little bit. Yes, Web is a very good example of the ideal module. It is very clean interfaces it has. It is doing very clean one function finding you matching strings. OK. Going into our. Trades besides the obstruction part, which we are going to talk, one of the traits that and one of the properties. The module should have to drive those things like good obstruction, clear interfaces. Is they need to be deep. Actually, it's very hard to do the good introverses, but. They are connected, but not very much connected. I think that the word we would like to hear to say that. The cost of a very good career obstruction is its tax. What does? The notion of a deep module means. No, it was on the right side. There is a very shallow picture. How do you interpret that? The cost is greater. On the right. What is greater and what is the cost? Cost can can you? We can think about cost as. An cleanliness? With or complexity of an interface. Right and associated benefit on the left side, it has a narrow interface and the benefit is much bigger because it's doing lots of things under the hood with a very narrow clean Yeah. interface on the left side on the right side it's wider. You need to pass. For example, you need the signature of. The function is very long. And what it does is very shallow. That's what we call now. Here is an example of the shallow module. This is made-up example. But it's from reality matrix operations. This is the code in Python. Anyone here doesn't know Python? OK, I assume everyone knows. Uh huh. OK. So here is the example of OK matrix operations. We are doing this matrix operations we are self. We are doing add and add is doing it in a very linear manner. And then the multiplies are just three cycles as usual. And this is a good example of why this module is shallow and why the interface is bad. Sorry, animation didn't work. I was supposing to do the right side letter, but it's OK. You agree with the right side. Do you agree with the why the interface is bad? And while it is shallow. Yes. Now that you know the shallow module, can you give me a real life example of a deep module? Whoop. Anyone anything comes in mind? Shoot. Maybe ecommerce platform? Say it again. Ecommerce platforms. Platform is a very big thing like. It's I'm talking about some kind of concise module that I can keep the mental model in my head. There was a canonical example. One of those. There are canonical example. One of those canonical examples is. Linux input output file system. Linux input output is a module on file system. The module has only 5 functions. Actually, now it has four because seek is not very used but only 5 functions. Open, close, read, write sillc. What? Is the input output module for files deep in Linux. Yes, it's deep because first of all you have a very clear interface. You have a path, you have flags. You have mold. How to open in terms of open? This is connected to the fastest. In general of course, but as a module is very deep because. You don't care about how fast are represented on disk, right? Are the linked list chunks? There are blobs in some storage. They are written as. Row major or not, row major B3 or not, B3 doesn't matter. You don't care about how directors are stored and how do you map. Hierarchical path name to actual content. Permissions. This is for that flags. Do you? You don't care about how. The permissions are enforced. If you access a file that will write and you don't have the read, write, read. On that file you will get an exception, or in the case of Linux, an error code. You don't care how the concurrent access is implemented because I can access the same file from different threads. It is up to the module to handle it correctly. So there are many things which are hidden. But this interface is very is giving you a very clean way to deal with files with input output because of the clear concept. You guys agree? So to sum up, can we say that Steve models we called models deep if it has complex structure and? Many multiple layers, many classes, components. Some extent no, it's not dark. It's not, it's the. Tip is going back to this picture. Deep module is connected with a very clear. Abstraction of a concept. Let's put it that way. And it does lots of things under the hood which you don't see. It does not mean does not necessarily needs to be in terms of the implementation complex or has lots of classes or has lots of it can have, but it does not necessarily need to have. The important thing is that it has narrow, clear abstraction or implemented the concept. And it is deep in terms of it does lots of things on the net. Andrea Pissman this is the good thing, or that it is just a very Oh, OK. shallow wrapping or function, right? On the other hand, I would guys you, I would encourage you to go look into the functions into the open function, the Linux. You will be surprised. Linux open function is something like 20,000 lines of code. If I remember correctly. But it's still very, very deep. It's very long. Because it needs to handle lots of things hidden from you. Because the concept that you are working is file open, read, write. Got it. Yes, yes. No. Thank you. Yes. OK. Now we are getting into the interesting part. Homework and homework is what we call problem K. So this is a real world interview example that. Was created by programmers in one of my previous companies by my request. To test the design skills. And. It's simple, but it's very beneficial for doing so. You need to implement a simple structured problem to design and implement a very simple structure problem. It's a command line tool. It runs from input output from the standard input standard output and it should be able to process. Table cells like Excel does, but in a very simplified syntax each cell. So you have spreadsheet spreadsheet. You know a spreadsheet has columns and rows. My name's are marked as with letters. Roles are marked with numbers. Each cell can contain. Here's the grammar. Our here is the description, not the grammar. It can be empty. It can have no negative integer. You know on the input. It can have text strings which defer the needs to start with tractor and quot. It can have expressions that will should start with a tractor equal. And no parenthesis. All operations have the same precedence. Well, references consist of a single leading letter followed by a digit to minimize to constrain the. Number. These constraints are introduced to simplify the problem. And you can safely rely on those constraints. Here is the formal grammar for the cell content. And take a look later. Now to process the. Sell all expressions must be replaced with the computed results. All calculations. Are performed using signed integer arithmetic. Text should be evaluated with all the prefix. No operations on text. If there is an error, you need to produce an error message starting with the hash symbol. And you can't use. Pencil libraries only the standard things. So you can use any language you want. But you cannot use third party. Input is standard input. Output is a standard output. Input data is represented the table where the first line depicts or says the number of rows and columns. Then you have the set of. All column in the row. This is the example. So on the first line you have 3 by 4. Then you have. There's an actual there's a mistake here. Oops, sorry. So. They're 3 by 4. This is the input. Sample input and you're expecting the sample output to be the following. Questions here. Any questions? No questions. Everything is clear. So you need to provide. If you can write requirement that will be can formalize requirements that will be extra good, but you need. To now think about the concept. Think about the function and mapping and do the composition and implemented. OK. It clear guys. Yes. Can I ask questions now? Or you can ask questions later in in discord. I'll be monitoring it so you can ask questions during the weekend. Too both me and Peter will be. The monitoring and rule answer. Oh, sorry. How can I access to your presentations? My first time. It's only it's. It's on the guitar. On. I'm just questioning. OK. Yes, Eric, you were asking. No, it wasn't. Navigate. No, no, no, it was just. No. I'm sorry, could you provide the link of the discord? Slam, not connection. That's true. I do it for so hard. I think that go here. Go. Nolan invites. Invite links. Invite links why this is? Good. OK, I. I'm putting into the chat. Also, if it doesn't work, you can ask. There should be an e-mail with your. Nickname and I'll try to directly add you, but I think this should work. OK, so I have a meal I mean. Very no. Doctor Lisa rosnick not. Who is this guy? Iguod did the homework. I will look into this and give you feedback. Early next week. OK. That's all I had for today. Any other closing questions?
